---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/50-59-logs/51-class-summaries/2024-fall/math-561/2024-11/2024-11-07/","updated":"2024-11-08T06:45:13-08:00"}
---

This following is a very brief summary of what happened in class on 2024-11-07.

We began by recalling the construction of the [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Tensor algebras\|tensor algebra]], $\mathcal{T}(M)$. We noted that it actually has the structure of a [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Ring theory/Graded rings\|graded ring]], where the degree $k$ component is the $k^{\text{th}}$ tensor power, $\mathcal{T}^k(M)$. In particular, the degree 0 and 1 components provide $R$-module inclusions $R\hookrightarrow \mathcal{T}(M)$ and $M\hookrightarrow \mathcal{T}(M)$. We also [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Tensor algebras#^e91163\|described bases]] for $\mathcal{T}(M)$ in the case $R=F$ is a field and $M=V$ is an $n$-dimensional vector space.

We then roughly sketched out the bijection

$$\operatorname{Hom}_{R\textbf{-Alg}}(\mathcal{T}(M),A)\xrightarrow{\sim} \operatorname{Hom}_{R\textbf{-Mod}}(M,U(A)).$$

First suppose you have an $R$-algebra morphism $\phi:\mathcal{T}(M)\to A$. Forgetting that multiplicative structure, we then have $R$-module morphisms from each summand, $\phi_k:\mathcal{T}^k(M)\to U(A)$. In particular, for $k=1$ we have an $R$-module morphism $\phi_1:M\to U(A)$.

Conversely, suppose you have an $R$-module morphism $\phi_1:M\to U(A)$. There is only one possible way to define $R$-module morphisms $\phi_k:\mathcal{T}^k(M)\to U(A)$ such that the corresponding morphism $\phi:\mathcal{T}\to U(A)$ is actually an $R$-algebra morphism, i.e., compatible with multiplication. For $k=0$, the $R$-module morphism $\phi_0:R\to U(A)$ is entirely determined by the image of $1_R$. For $\phi:\mathcal{T}(M)\to U(A)$ to be a ring morphism, we must have $1_R\mapsto 1_A$. Thus, $\phi_0$ is completely determined. For $k=1$, our component function must agree with $\phi_1$. For $k=2$, if $\phi$ is to be a ring morphism then for every simple tensor $m\otimes m'\in \mathcal{T}^2(M)$ we must have $\phi_2(m\otimes m')=\phi(m\otimes m') = \phi(m)\phi(m')=\phi_1(m)\phi_1(m')$. So, $\phi_2$ is completely determined by $\phi_1$, and so on. Finally, one can verify that the map $\phi:\mathcal{T}(M)\to A$ defined in this way actually does define an $R$-algebra morphism, and these two associations are indeed mutual inverses.

We then proceeded to ask for a construction analogous to the tensor algebra construction, but which produced *commutative* $R$-algebras. This led us to the [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric algebras\|symmetric algebra]] functor. The construction was simple, namely quotienting the tensor algebra $\mathcal{T}(M)$ by the (graded) ideal $\mathcal{C}(M)$ generated by all tensors of the form $m\otimes m'-m'\otimes m$. This created commutative graded $R$-algebra $\mathcal{S}(M)$, called the **symmetric algebra**. We also introduced new notation, writing, for example, simply $m_1m_2$ for the coset $m_1\otimes m_2+\mathcal{C}(M)$.

We [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric algebras#Example\|noted]] how to think about this construction in the vector space example.

Finally, we recalled a bit about the classical determinant function and started the construction of our final algebra, namely the [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Exterior algebras\|exterior algebra]]. We didn't get far, however, before running out of time. We'll talk more about the exterior algebra next class.
## Concepts

- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Tensor algebras\|Tensor algebras]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric algebras\|Symmetric algebras]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Exterior algebras\|Exterior algebras]]

## References

- Dummit & Foote: Section 11.5