---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/10-19-teaching/11-classes/math-561-graduate-algebra/2024-fall/homework/homework-6/","updated":"2024-11-11T15:26:06-08:00"}
---

## Problem 1


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




Suppose $R$ is a commutative ring and $M$ is an $R$-module. Prove that for $m, n_1, n_2, \ldots, n_k \in M$ one always has

$m\wedge n_1\wedge n_2\wedge \cdots \wedge n_k = (-1)^k (n_1\wedge n_2\wedge \cdots \wedge n_k)\wedge m.$

> [!summary]- Solution
> This follows by induction on $k$. When $k=1$, the result $m\wedge n_1 = -(n_1\wedge m)$ was proven [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Exterior algebras#The alternating property\|here]]. Suppose the result holds for some $k\geq 1$. Then observe that
> 
> $\begin{align*} m_1\wedge n_1\wedge n_2\wedge \cdots \wedge n_{k+1} &= (m_1\wedge n_1)\wedge n_2\wedge \cdots \wedge n_{k+1}\\ &= -(n_1\wedge m)\wedge n_2\wedge \cdots \wedge n_{k+1}\\ &= -(n_1\wedge (m\wedge n_2\wedge \cdots \wedge n_{k+1}))\\ &= -(n_1\wedge ((-1)^k (n_2\wedge n_3\wedge \cdots \wedge n_{k+1})\wedge m))\\ &= (-1)^{k+1}  (n_1\wedge n_2\wedge n_3\wedge \cdots \wedge n_{k+1})\wedge m. \end{align*}$
> 
> We've thus proven the result holds for $k+1$ and hence holds for all $k\geq 1$ by mathematical induction.



</div></div>


---

## Problem 2


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




Suppose $R$ is a commutative ring. Prove that for each cyclic $R$-module $M$ we have $\mathcal{T}(M)\simeq\mathcal{S}(M)$; i.e., the tensor algebra is already commutative.

>[!summary]- Hint
>Show the ideal $\mathcal{C}(M)$ is trivial.

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> Let $m_0\in M$ be a generator for $M$ as an $R$-module. Then every $m\in M$ is of the form $m=rm_0$ for some $r\in R$ (not necessarily unique). In particular, every simple 2-tensor $m\otimes m'$ is of the form $(rm_0)\otimes (r'm_0)$ for some $r,r'\in R$. But then observe that
> 
> $m\otimes m' = (rm_0)\otimes (r'm_0)=rr'\cdot (m_0\otimes m_0).$
> 
> In particular, we always have
> 
> $\begin{align*} m\otimes m'-m'\otimes m &= rr'\cdot (m_0\otimes m_0)-r'r\cdot (m_0\otimes m_0)\\ &= (rr'-r'r)\cdot (m_0\otimes m_0)\\ &= 0_r\cdot (m_0\otimes m_0)\\ &= 0. \end{align*}$
> 
> Since the ideal $\mathcal{C}(M)$ is generated by 2-tensors of the form $m\otimes m'-m'\otimes m$ and these tensors are all zero, the entire ideal $\mathcal{C}(M)$ must be trivial. It follows that
> 
> $\mathcal{S}(M)=\mathcal{T}(M)/\mathcal{C}(M)=\mathcal{T}(M)/0\simeq \mathcal{T}(M).$



</div></div>


---

## Problem 3


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




Suppose $R$ is a commutative ring and $M$ is a free $R$-module of rank $n$, i.e., $M\simeq F(X)$ for some set $X$ with $n$ elements.  Prove that $\bigwedge^k (M)$ is a free $R$-module of rank $\binom{n}{k}$ for $k=0,1,2,\ldots, n$.

>[!summary]- Hint
>You can use [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Exterior algebras#^51701e\|the fact]] that for $0\leq k\leq n$ the $R$-module $\bigwedge^k (M)$ is a free $R$-module with a basis explicitly given in terms of a basis for $M$.

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> Let $\mathcal{B}=\{m_1,\ldots, m_n\}$ be a basis for $M$ as a free $R$-module. We [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Exterior algebras#^51701e\|know]] that for $0\leq k\leq n$ the $R$-module $\bigwedge^k(M)$ is a free $R$-module with basis
> 
> $\{v_{i_1}\wedge \cdots \wedge v_{i_k}\mid 1\leq i_1<\cdots < i_k\leq n\}$
> 
> It follows that the dimension of $\bigwedge^k (M)$ is equal to the number of $k$-tuples of integers $(i_1,\ldots, i_k)$ satisfying $1\leq i_1<\cdots <i_k\leq n$. The number of such $k$-tuples is exactly $\binom{n}{k}$, since any choice of $k$ distinct integers from the set $\{1,\ldots, n\}$ produces a unique such $k$-tuple (obtained by simply listing the chosen distinct integers in ascending order).



</div></div>


---

## Problem 4


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




Suppose $F$ is a field of characteristic not 2. Show that for every $F$-vector space $V$ we have an $F$-vector space isomorphism
$V\otimes_F V\simeq \mathcal{S}^2(V)\oplus \bigwedge^2(V).$
In other words, show that every 2-tensor may be written uniquely as a sum of a symmetric and an alternating tensor.

>[!summary]- Hint
>For each 2-tensor $z$, show that $z=\frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Sym}(z)+\frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Alt}(z)$, where $\operatorname{Sym}(z)$ and $\operatorname{Alt}(z)$ are the [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric and alternating tensors#Symmetrization and skew-symmetrization\|symmetrization]] and [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric and alternating tensors#Symmetrization and skew-symmetrization\|skew-symmetrization]]of $z$, respectively.
>
>This will show $V\otimes_F F$ is the sum of the submodules of symmetric and alternating tensors. To show it is the direct sum, verify that the only 2-tensor that is both symmetric and alternating is $0$.
>
>Finally, you can use the [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric and alternating tensors#^931c11\|fact]] that there is an isomorphism between the symmetric power (respectively, exterior power) and the submodule of symmetric tensors (respectively, alternating tensors).

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> Let $m_1\otimes m_2$ be any simple tensor in $V\otimes_F V$. The symmetrization and skew-symmetrization of $m_1\otimes m_2$ are then
> 
> $\begin{align*} \operatorname{Sym}(m_1\otimes m_2)&=m_1\otimes m_2+m_2\otimes m_1\\ \operatorname{Alt}(m_1\otimes m_2)&= m_1\otimes m_2-m_2\otimes m_1. \end{align*}$
> 
> Observe that $\operatorname{Sym}(m_1\otimes m_2)$ is symmetric, $\operatorname{Alt}(m_1\otimes m_2)$ is alternating, and
> 
> $\begin{align*} m_1\otimes m_2 &= \frac{1}{2}(m_1\otimes m_2+m_2\otimes m_1)+\frac{1}{2}(m_1\otimes m_2-m_2\otimes m_1)\\ &= \frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Sym}(m_1\otimes m_2)+\frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Alt}(m_1\otimes m_2).\end{align*}$
> 
> The symmetrization and skew-symmetrization maps are actually $R$-module endomorphisms on $V\otimes_F V$, which just means they extend $R$-linearly to the general 2-tensors; i.e., if $z=\displaystyle \sum_{i=1}^{n}(m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})$ then
> 
> $\begin{align*} \operatorname{Sym}(z)&= \sum_{i=1}^n ((m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})+(m_{i_2}\otimes m_{i_1}))= \sum_{i=1}^n \operatorname{Sym(m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})}, \end{align*}$
> 
> and similarly for $\operatorname{Alt}(z)$. It follows that for every 2-tensor $z$ we have
> 
> $z=\frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Sym}(z)+\frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Alt}(z).$
> 
> We've thus shown that every 2-tensor can be written as the sum of a symmetric 2-tensor and an alternating 2-tensor. This proves that $V\otimes_F V$ is at least the *sum* of the submodules of symmetric and alternating 2-tensors.
> 
> To show we have a direct sum decomposition we need to show that the submodules of symmetric and alternating 2-tensors have trivial intersection. To that end, suppose that a 2-tensor $z$ is both symmetric and alternating. Let $z=\displaystyle \sum_{i=1}^{n}(m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})$. Then because $z$ is symmetric we have
> 
> $z=\sum_{i=1}^n (m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})=\sum_{i=1}^n (m_{i_2}\otimes m_{i_1}).$
> 
> On the other hand, because $z$ is alternating we also have
> 
> $z=\sum_{i=1}^n (m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})=-\sum_{i=1}^n (m_{i_2}\otimes m_{i_1}).$
> 
> Summing these two equations then gives $2z=0$ and hence $z=0$ (since the characteristic of our field $F$ is not 2).
> 
> Thus, the $F$-vector space $V\otimes_F V$ is (isomorphic to) the direct sum of the submodules of symmetric and alternating 2-tensors. It [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric and alternating tensors#^931c11\|now follows]] that $V\otimes_F V\simeq \mathcal{S}^2(V)\oplus \bigwedge^2(V)$.


</div></div>

