---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/40-49-knowledge/41-mathematics/ring-theory/special-types-of-rings/division-rings/","tags":["ring_theory"],"updated":"2025-07-15T09:54:47-07:00"}
---

## Definition and examples
---

> [!info] Definition of division ring
> A **division ring** is a [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Ring theory/Basic definitions and examples/Rings#Conventional definition\|ring]] in which every nonzero element is a unit.

A community division ring is a **field**.

*Examples still to come.*

## An interesting result
---

Here's a little result:

> [!summary] Abelian subgroups of division rings
> Suppose $R$ is a division ring and $A\leq R^{\times}$ is an abelian subgroup of the multiplicative group $R^{\times}$. Then there exists a field $F$ and an isomorphism of $A$ with a subgroup of $F^{\times}$.

*Proof.* First consider the subset $D\subseteq R$ defined by

$$
D = \left\{\sum_{a\in A} n_a a\mid n_a\in {\bf Z}, \text{all but finitely many zero} \right\}.
$$

As sets, we certainly have $A\subseteq D$. Also, the subset $D$ is easily seen to be a commutative subring of the division ring $R$.  While it might not be true that $D$ is itself a division ring, at the very least $D$ is an integral domain. Let $F$ be a field of fractions of $D$, with injective ring morphism $i:D\to F$. Restricting $i$ to $A$ yields an injective group morphism $i:A\to F^{\times}$, providing an isomorphism of $A$ with a subgroup of $F^{\times}$.  $\blacksquare$

> [!warning] Division subring generated by $A$?
> The above result is mentioned in a parenthetical hint in Exercise 14 of Section 18.1 in Dummit & Foote. In that hint, it is suggested that the reader "consider the division subring generated by $A$." I'm not quite certain of the validity of this suggestion, though. At the very least, I see no reason to believe that the subring $D$, above, is a *division* subring. (Perhaps there is some result I'm missing?) If we "expand" $D$ to the smallest division subring containing $D$ (assuming such a subring exists), it's no longer clear such a subring is commutative.

> [!summary] Corollay
> If $R$ is a division ring and $A\leq R^{\times}$ is a finite abelian subgroup of $R^{\times}$, then $A$ is cyclic.

*Proof.* By the previous result, there exists a field $F$ such that $A$ is isomorphic to a (finite, abelian) subgroup $B\leq F^{\times}$. Since every finite subgroup of the group of units of a field is cyclic, it follows that $B$ (and hence $A$) is cyclic.  $\blacksquare$


## Categorical interpretation
---

From the point of view of category theory, the above results (and their proofs) are a complete mess. We start with a division *ring*, then talk about a sub*group* of the group of units of that division ring, then back to a sub*ring* generated by the sub*group* (considered as a sub*set*), then to a field with a *ring* morphism, which we then restrict to a *group* morphism. Blech! We should really try to carefully frame the situation with relevant categories and the functors we're using to move between them.

*Coming soon.*