---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/50-59-logs/51-class-summaries/2025-fall/math-561/2025-10/2025-10-30/","updated":"2025-10-30T13:53:21-07:00"}
---

This following is a very brief summary of what happened in class on 2025-10-30.

We began by asking whether an $R$-module $M$ can be endowed with a multiplication to give it a full ring structure, in a way compatible with the given $R$ action. That led us to the idea of an [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Algebras\|algebra]]. We gave two possible definitions of an $R$-algebra, one from the point of view of modules and one from the point of view of rings. We spent most of the class verifying these two definitions are indeed equivalent.

> [!warning] Warning!
> In my original "module-focused" definition of an $R$-algebra, I forgot one key part of the definition, namely that the $R$-action is compatible with the internal product; i.e., that we can either multiply internally first and then act, or act *on one of the two elements* and then multiply the result. In other words, for every $r\in R$ and $a_1, a_2\in A$, we must have
> 
> $$r(a_1a_2) = (ra_1)a_2 = a_1(ra_2).$$
> 
> I initially forgot that last equality, which caused us to get stuck for a bit trying to show the equivalence of this definition with the ring-focused definition. It's exactly this last equality that matches with the ring-focused condition that the ring morphism $f:R\to A$ have image contained in the center of $A$.
> 
> Sorry again for the glitch!

We also quickly defined [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Algebras#Morphisms of algebras\|morphisms]] of algebras.

Next time we'll define a functor $\mathcal{T}:R\textbf{-Mod}\to R\textbf{-Alg}$ that is adjoint to the corresponding forgetful functor.

## Concepts
---

- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Algebras\|Algebras]]

## References
---

- Dummit & Foote, *Abstract Algebra*: Section 11.5