---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/50-59-logs/51-class-summaries/2024-fall/math-561/2024-10/2024-10-03/","updated":"2024-10-03T13:45:59-07:00"}
---

This following is a very brief summary of what happened in class on 2024-10-03.

We introduced three new constructions on modules:
	1. The [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Direct products of modules\|direct product]] of a pair of $R$-modules
	2. The [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Direct sums of modules\|direct sum]] of a pair of $R$-modules
	3. The [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Sums of submodules\|sum]] of a pair of submodules of a given $R$-modules
We outlined the three constructions (as sets with operations and $R$-actions), and then spent the rest of our time putting the constructions into the framework of category theory. We talked about how the first two constructions occur in the category $R\textbf{-Mod}$ and satisfy similar ("dual") universal properties, while the third construction happens in a different category (namely the category of submodules of a fixed module). We also mentioned the idea of extending the constructions to entire families of modules (or submodules).

Tomorrow we'll briefly outline some of the main properties of the three constructions, including when they're different (the default situation) and when they're the same/isomorphic (in some special situations). We'll then return to the general idea of "universal properties" and see if we can't firm things up a bit.
## Concepts

- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Direct products of modules\|Direct products of modules]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Direct sums of modules\|Direct sums of modules]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Sums of submodules\|Sums of submodules]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Direct products vs. direct sums vs. sums\|Direct products vs. direct sums vs. sums]]

## References

- Dummit & Foote: Section 10.3