---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/50-59-logs/51-class-summaries/2024-fall/math-561/2024-10/2024-10-29/","updated":"2024-10-29T13:09:24-07:00"}
---

This following is a very brief summary of what happened in class on 2024-10-29.

We began by defining [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Exact sequences/Exact Sequences III - Morphisms of Exact Sequences\|morphisms of chain complexes]] and hence also morphisms of exact sequences. We noted that the commutativity condition in morphisms between exact sequences can result in some surprising conclusions, using the famous [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Exact sequences/Exact Sequences III - Morphisms of Exact Sequences#^be3450\|Short Five Lemma]] as an example. We'll return to "diagram lemmas" in [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian categories/Diagram lemmas\|glorious detail]] in a few weeks.

We then took our first steps towards understanding chain complexes (and exact sequences) by asking how they interact with functors. In particular, we set the stage to study the interaction between exact sequences and three functors:
- the hom-out functor $\operatorname{Hom}_R(M,-)$
- the hom-in functor $\operatorname{Hom}_R(-,N)$
- the tensor product functor $M\otimes_R -$

We noted that, since the set $\operatorname{Hom}_R(M,N)$ has a *natural* structure of an abelian group, the first two functors actually "factor through" the forgetful functor $U:\textbf{Ab}\to \textbf{Set}$. In other words, we can view them both as functors to the category of abelian groups. Because of this, it makes sense to ask whether the image of an exact sequence in the category $R\textbf{-Mod}$ is another exact sequence in the category $\textbf{Ab}$, or whether something goes wrong.

We ended by noting (but not proving!) that the hom-out functor is **left exact** but not **exact**. More on that next class!
## Concepts

- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Exact sequences/Exact Sequences III - Morphisms of Exact Sequences\|Exact Sequences III - Morphisms of Exact Sequences]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Exact sequences/Exact Sequences IV - Exact Sequences and Functors\|Exact Sequences IV - Exact Sequences and Functors]]

## References

- Dummit & Foote: Section 10.5