---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/50-59-logs/51-class-summaries/2024-fall/math-561/2024-12/2024-12-05/","updated":"2024-12-05T11:34:41-08:00"}
---

This following is a very brief summary of what happened in class on 2024-12-05.

We picked up our study of [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian Categories/Chain complexes\|chain complexes]], recalling their definition and defining morphisms of chain complexes. We noted that the category of chain complexes is itself an abelian category, so it made sense to talk about chain complexes in that category. This led to the idea of a [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian Categories/Double complexes and mural maps\|double complex]].

We then analyzed the various ways to measure exactness in a chain complex. We noted that there are "horizontal" and "vertical" homology objects, as well as two related quotient objects arising from certain "diagonal" arrows. We called these new objects the [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian Categories/Double complexes and mural maps#^f322ef\|donor and receptor objects]]. We then noted the existence of [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian Categories/Double complexes and mural maps#^0fc186\|intramural]] and [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian Categories/Double complexes and mural maps#^2eece1\|extramural]] maps.

We finally brought all of these objects together in the (soon-to-be?) celebrated [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian Categories/The Salamander Lemma\|Salamander Lemma]]. While we didn't prove that lemma, we did see how it immediately leads to situations in which the extramural maps are isomorphisms.

Tomorrow we will start by noting situations in which the Salamander Lemma guarantees intramural maps are isomorphisms, and then we'll set the Salamander Lemma loose on a bunch of named [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian Categories/Diagram lemmas\|diagram lemmas]]. Beward, Snake Lemma! The Salamander Lemma is coming for you!
## Concepts

- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian Categories/Chain complexes\|Chain complexes]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian Categories/Double complexes and mural maps\|Double complexes and mural maps]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian Categories/The Salamander Lemma\|The Salamander Lemma]]

## References

- nLab, if you dare