---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/50-59-logs/51-class-summaries/2024-fall/math-561/2024-12/2024-12-03/","updated":"2024-12-03T13:46:33-08:00"}
---

This following is a very brief summary of what happened in class on 2024-12-03.

We started by recalling the six properties of an [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian categories/Abelian categories\|abelian category]]. We then spent a bit of time talking about the element-free definition of a [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian categories/Abelian categories#Kernels and Cokernels\|kernel]], which makes sense in any category with a null object. We noted that in an additive category, an equalizer of a pair of parallel arrows $f,g:a\to b$ is (uniquely isomorphic to) a kernel of the difference arrow $f-g:a\to b$. Because of this fact, and the fact that many of the categories we are familiar with are additive, it has been historically more popular to talk about kernels than to talk about equalizers.

We then introduced the idea of a [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian categories/Chain complexes\|chain complex]], which makes sense in any category that contains a null object. We then recalled the definition of an [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Exact sequences/Exact Sequences II - Exact Sequences\|exact sequence]] in a category of modules, and noted that the definition required the concept of an image of an arrow.

We then took an aside to give an [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian categories/Exact sequences and chain homology#Images of morphisms\|element-free definition of the image of a morphism]].

If all of these element-free definitions (of kernels and images and bears, oh my!) are driving you crazy, keep in mind that the "official" definitions are being made so as to be as broadly applicable as possible; i.e., in "non-concrete" categories where notions of "elements" is not officially available. However, in our context (of abelian categories), it turns out that every abelian category is (equivalent to) a subcategory of a category of modules. This means we're free to treat objects and arrows in an abelian category as we would modules and module morphisms. We can refer to elements and view arrows as (particular) set maps between sets of elements. We'll do just that in our final two classes of the quarter.
## Concepts

- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian categories/Abelian categories\|Abelian categories]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian categories/Chain complexes\|Chain complexes]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Abelian categories/Exact sequences and chain homology\|Exact sequences and chain homology]]

## References

- TBD