---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/10-19-teaching/11-classes/math-561-graduate-algebra/2025-fall/homework/homework-8/","updated":"2025-11-04T13:47:50-08:00"}
---

## Problem 1
---


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




Suppose $R$ is a commutative ring. Prove that for each cyclic $R$-module $M$ we have $\mathcal{T}(M)\simeq\mathcal{S}(M)$; i.e., the tensor algebra is already commutative.

> [!info]- Hint
> Show the ideal $\mathcal{C}(M)$ is trivial.

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> Let $m_0\in M$ be a generator for $M$ as an $R$-module. Then every $m\in M$ is of the form $m=rm_0$ for some $r\in R$ (not necessarily unique). In particular, every simple 2-tensor $m\otimes m'$ is of the form $(rm_0)\otimes (r'm_0)$ for some $r,r'\in R$. But then observe that
> 
> $m\otimes m' = (rm_0)\otimes (r'm_0)=rr'\cdot (m_0\otimes m_0).$
> 
> In particular, we always have
> 
> $\begin{align*} m\otimes m'-m'\otimes m &= rr'\cdot (m_0\otimes m_0)-r'r\cdot (m_0\otimes m_0)\\ &= (rr'-r'r)\cdot (m_0\otimes m_0)\\ &= 0_r\cdot (m_0\otimes m_0)\\ &= 0. \end{align*}$
> 
> Since the ideal $\mathcal{C}(M)$ is generated by 2-tensors of the form $m\otimes m'-m'\otimes m$ and these tensors are all zero, the entire ideal $\mathcal{C}(M)$ must be trivial. It follows that
> 
> $\mathcal{S}(M)=\mathcal{T}(M)/\mathcal{C}(M)=\mathcal{T}(M)/0\simeq \mathcal{T}(M).$



</div></div>


## Problem 2
---


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




Suppose $R$ is a commutative ring and $M$ is a free $R$-module of rank $n$, i.e., $M\simeq F(X)$ for some set $X$ with $n$ elements.  Prove that $\bigwedge^k (M)$ is a free $R$-module of rank $\binom{n}{k}$ for $k=0,1,2,\ldots, n$.

> [!info]- Hint
> You can use [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Exterior algebras#^51701e\|the fact]] that for $0\leq k\leq n$ the $R$-module $\bigwedge^k (M)$ is a free $R$-module with a basis explicitly given in terms of a basis for $M$.

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> Let $\mathcal{B}=\{m_1,\ldots, m_n\}$ be a basis for $M$ as a free $R$-module. We [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Exterior algebras#^51701e\|know]] that for $0\leq k\leq n$ the $R$-module $\bigwedge^k(M)$ is a free $R$-module with basis
> 
> $\{v_{i_1}\wedge \cdots \wedge v_{i_k}\mid 1\leq i_1<\cdots < i_k\leq n\}$
> 
> It follows that the dimension of $\bigwedge^k (M)$ is equal to the number of $k$-tuples of integers $(i_1,\ldots, i_k)$ satisfying $1\leq i_1<\cdots <i_k\leq n$. The number of such $k$-tuples is exactly $\binom{n}{k}$, since any choice of $k$ distinct integers from the set $\{1,\ldots, n\}$ produces a unique such $k$-tuple (obtained by simply listing the chosen distinct integers in ascending order).



</div></div>


## Problem 3
---

> [!warning] Problem removed!
> For time reasons, we are skipping the notions of [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric and alternating tensors\|symmetric and alternating tensors]]. As such, this problem is no longer relevant and should be skipped.


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




Suppose $F$ is a field of characteristic not 2. Show that for every $F$-vector space $V$ we have an $F$-vector space isomorphism
$V\otimes_F V\simeq \mathcal{S}^2(V)\oplus \bigwedge^2(V).$
In other words, show that every 2-tensor may be written uniquely as a sum of a symmetric and an alternating tensor.

> [!info]- Hint
> For each 2-tensor $z$, show that $z=\frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Sym}(z)+\frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Alt}(z)$, where $\operatorname{Sym}(z)$ and $\operatorname{Alt}(z)$ are the [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric and alternating tensors#Symmetrization and skew-symmetrization\|symmetrization]] and [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric and alternating tensors#Symmetrization and skew-symmetrization\|skew-symmetrization]]of $z$, respectively.
>
> This will show $V\otimes_F F$ is the sum of the submodules of symmetric and alternating tensors. To show it is the direct sum, verify that the only 2-tensor that is both symmetric and alternating is $0$.
>
> Finally, you can use the [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric and alternating tensors#^931c11\|fact]] that there is an isomorphism between the symmetric power (respectively, exterior power) and the submodule of symmetric tensors (respectively, alternating tensors).

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> Let $m_1\otimes m_2$ be any simple tensor in $V\otimes_F V$. The symmetrization and skew-symmetrization of $m_1\otimes m_2$ are then
> 
> $\begin{align*} \operatorname{Sym}(m_1\otimes m_2)&=m_1\otimes m_2+m_2\otimes m_1\\ \operatorname{Alt}(m_1\otimes m_2)&= m_1\otimes m_2-m_2\otimes m_1. \end{align*}$
> 
> Observe that $\operatorname{Sym}(m_1\otimes m_2)$ is symmetric, $\operatorname{Alt}(m_1\otimes m_2)$ is alternating, and
> 
> $\begin{align*} m_1\otimes m_2 &= \frac{1}{2}(m_1\otimes m_2+m_2\otimes m_1)+\frac{1}{2}(m_1\otimes m_2-m_2\otimes m_1)\\ &= \frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Sym}(m_1\otimes m_2)+\frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Alt}(m_1\otimes m_2).\end{align*}$
> 
> The symmetrization and skew-symmetrization maps are actually $R$-module endomorphisms on $V\otimes_F V$, which just means they extend $R$-linearly to the general 2-tensors; i.e., if $z=\displaystyle \sum_{i=1}^{n}(m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})$ then
> 
> $\begin{align*} \operatorname{Sym}(z)&= \sum_{i=1}^n ((m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})+(m_{i_2}\otimes m_{i_1}))= \sum_{i=1}^n \operatorname{Sym(m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})}, \end{align*}$
> 
> and similarly for $\operatorname{Alt}(z)$. It follows that for every 2-tensor $z$ we have
> 
> $z=\frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Sym}(z)+\frac{1}{2}\operatorname{Alt}(z).$
> 
> We've thus shown that every 2-tensor can be written as the sum of a symmetric 2-tensor and an alternating 2-tensor. This proves that $V\otimes_F V$ is at least the *sum* of the submodules of symmetric and alternating 2-tensors.
> 
> To show we have a direct sum decomposition we need to show that the submodules of symmetric and alternating 2-tensors have trivial intersection. To that end, suppose that a 2-tensor $z$ is both symmetric and alternating. Let $z=\displaystyle \sum_{i=1}^{n}(m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})$. Then because $z$ is symmetric we have
> 
> $z=\sum_{i=1}^n (m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})=\sum_{i=1}^n (m_{i_2}\otimes m_{i_1}).$
> 
> On the other hand, because $z$ is alternating we also have
> 
> $z=\sum_{i=1}^n (m_{i_1}\otimes m_{i_2})=-\sum_{i=1}^n (m_{i_2}\otimes m_{i_1}).$
> 
> Summing these two equations then gives $2z=0$ and hence $z=0$ (since the characteristic of our field $F$ is not 2).
> 
> Thus, the $F$-vector space $V\otimes_F V$ is (isomorphic to) the direct sum of the submodules of symmetric and alternating 2-tensors. It [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Algebra theory/Symmetric and alternating tensors#^931c11\|now follows]] that $V\otimes_F V\simeq \mathcal{S}^2(V)\oplus \bigwedge^2(V)$.


</div></div>


## Problem 4
---


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><a class="markdown-embed-link" href="/10-19-teaching/11-classes/math-561-graduate-algebra/exercises/alternate-characterization-of-rank/" aria-label="Open link"><svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="svg-icon lucide-link"><path d="M10 13a5 5 0 0 0 7.54.54l3-3a5 5 0 0 0-7.07-7.07l-1.72 1.71"></path><path d="M14 11a5 5 0 0 0-7.54-.54l-3 3a5 5 0 0 0 7.07 7.07l1.71-1.71"></path></svg></a><div class="markdown-embed">




Let $R$ be an integral domain and $M$ be a $R$-module.

1. Suppose that $M$ has rank $n$ and $S=\{m_1,\ldots, m_n\}$ is a maximal linearly independent set of elements in $M$. Let $N$ be the submodule generated by $S$. Prove that $N\simeq R^n$ and $M/N$ is a torsion $R$-module.
2. Conversely, prove that if $M$ contains a submodule $N$ that is free of rank $n$ such that the quotient $M/N$ is a torsion $R$-module, then $M$ has rank $n$.

> [!info]- Hints
> 1. Show that for any $m\in M$ there is a nonzero $r\in R$ such that $rm=r_1m_1+\cdots +r_nm_n$ for some $r_i\in R$.
> 2. Let $\{m_1,\ldots, m_{n+1}\}$ be a set of $n+1$ elements of  $M$. Find some nonzero $r_i\in R$ so that $r_i m_i$ can be written using a basis for $N$. Then show the $r_i m_i$ (and hence $m_i$) are linearly dependent.

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> 1. Let $A=\{x_1,\ldots, x_k\}$ be a fixed set with $n$ elements and define an $R$-module morphism $f:F(A)\to M$ by $x_i\mapsto m_i$. The image of $f$ is exactly the submodule $N$ and the kernel of $f$ is the set of all formal sums $r_1x_1+\cdots +r_kx_k$ such that $r_1m_1+\cdots r_km_k=0_M$. Since the set $\{m_1,\ldots, m_k\}$ is $R$-linearly independent, it follows that $\ker(f)=(0)$ and so by the First Isomorphism Theorem for modules $F(A)\simeq F(A)/\ker(f)\simeq \operatorname{im}(f)=N$. This proves $N\simeq F(A)\simeq R^k$.
>    
>    We next prove $M/N$ is torsion. Take any element $m+N$ in $M/N$. The set $T=\{m_1,\ldots, m_k,m\}$ of $n+1$ elements must then be linearly dependent, so there are some $r_i\in R$ (not all zero) such that
>    
>    $r_1m_1+\cdots +r_km_k+r_{k+1}m=0_M.$
>    
>    We cannot have $r_{k+1}=0_R$, since the above relation would then yield a nontrivial relation on the set $S$. So we must have $r_{k+1}\neq 0_R$. But now notice that $-r_{k+1}m=r_1m_1+\cdots +r_km_k\in N$, so
>    
>    $-r_{k+1}(m+N)=-r_{k+1}m+N=N=0_{M/N}.$
>    
>    Thus, the element $m+N$ is torsion in $M/N$.
>    
> 2. First notice that since $M$ contains a submodule $N$ of rank $k$, the rank of $M$ must be at least $k$. (Any independent set of elements in $N$ is also an independent set of elements in $M$.) So we only need to prove $M$ does not have an independent subsets consisting of more than $k$ elements. To that end, suppose $\{m_1,\ldots, m_{k+1}\}$ is any set of $k+1$ elements of $M$. Since $M/N$ is torsion, for each $i$ the coset $m_i+N$ is torsion in $M/N$. This implies there is some nonzero $r_i\in R$ with $r_i(m_i+N)=0_{M/N}$; i.e., $r_im_i\in N$. But then we have a set $\{r_1m_1,\ldots, r_{k+1}m_{k+1}\}$ of $k+1$ elements in the module $N$ (which has rank $k$), so this set must be $R$-linearly dependent. This implies there are $r_1',\ldots, r_{k+1}'\in R$ (not all zero) such that
>    
>    $r_1'(r_1m_1)+\cdots +r_{k+1}'(r_{k+1}m_{k+1})=0_N.$
>    
>    Since $0_N=0_M$, the above equality gives the relation
>    
>    $(r_1'r_1)m_1+\cdots +(r_{k+1}'r_{k+1})m_{k+1}=0_M.$
>    
>    Every $r_i$ is nonzero and at least one $r_j'$ is nonzero, so (since $R$ is a domain) the elements $r_i'r_i$ are not all zero. Thus, the above relation implies the set $\{m_1,\ldots, m_{k+1}\}$ is $R$-linearly dependent. We've proven that $M$ does not contain any linearly independent sets with more than $k$ elements, and hence the rank of $M$ is no more than $k$. By our earlier remarks, this proves the rank of $M$ is exactly $k$.

</div></div>


## Problem 5
---


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




Let $R$ be an integral domain. Prove that if $A$ and $B$ are $R$-modules of ranks $m$ and $n$, respectively, then $A\oplus B$ is an $R$-module of rank $m+n$.

> [!info]- Hint
> Use [[10-19 Teaching/11 Classes/MATH 561 - Graduate Algebra/Exercises/Alternate characterization of rank\|an alternate characterization of rank]].

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> Let $i_A:A\to A\oplus B$ and $i_B:B\to A\oplus B$ be the natural injective $R$-module morphisms (that are part of the construction of the direct sum $A\oplus B$). At the level of elements, these maps are $a\mapsto a\oplus 0_B$ and $b\mapsto 0_A\oplus b$, respectively.
> 
> Let $\{a_1,\ldots, a_m\}$ and $\{b_1,\ldots, b_n\}$ be $R$-linearly independent subsets of $A$ and $B$, respectively. We first prove that the set $S=\{i_A(a_1),\ldots, i_A(a_m),i_B(b_1),\ldots, i_B(b_n)\}$ is an $R$-linearly independent subset in $A\oplus B$. To see this, suppose we have $r_i, r'_j\in R$ such that
> 
> $r_1i_A(a_1)+\cdots +r_mi_A(a_m)+r_1'i_B(b_1)+\cdots r_n'i_B(b_n)=0_{A\oplus B}.$
> 
> The above equation is equivalent to the equality
> 
> $i_A(r_1a_1+\cdots+r_ma_m)+i_B(r_1'b_1+\cdots +r_n'b_n)=0_{A\oplus B}.$
> 
> By the definition of $i_A$ and $i_B$, the above is equivalent to the equality of formal sums
> 
> $(r_1a_1+\cdots+r_ma_m)\oplus (r_1'b_1+\cdots+r_n'b_n)=0_A\oplus 0_B.$
> 
> This is last equality is equivalent to the pair of equalities
> 
> $r_1a_1+\cdots+r_ma_m=0_A\quad\text{and}\quad r_1'b_1+\cdots+r_n'b_n=0_B.$
> 
> Since the sets $\{a_1,\ldots, a_m\}$ and $\{b_1,\ldots, b_n\}$ are $R$-linearly independent, the above equalities imply all $r_i=0_R$ and $r_j'=0_R$. Thus, the set $S$ is indeed $R$-linearly independent.
> 
> Let $N$ be the submodule of $A\oplus B$ generated by the set $S$. Then $N$ is a free module of rank $m+n$. We will now show that the quotient $(A\oplus B)/N$ is torsion, at which point [[10-19 Teaching/11 Classes/MATH 561 - Graduate Algebra/Exercises/Alternate characterization of rank\|it will follow]] that the rank of $A\oplus B$ is exactly $m+n$. Take any element in $(A\oplus B)/N$, say a coset $(a\oplus b)+N$. The sets $\{a_1,\ldots, a_m,a\}$ and $\{b_1,\ldots, b_n,b\}$ must both be $R$-linearly dependent (since $A$ and $B$ have ranks $m$ and $n$, respectively). This implies there are $r_i, r_j'\in R$ such that
> 
> $r_1a_1+\cdots+r_ma_m+r_{m+1}a=0_A\quad\text{and}\quad r_1'b_1+\cdots+r_n'b_n+r_{n+1}'b=0_B$
> 
> Since the sets $\{a_1,\ldots, a_m\}$ and $\{b_1,\ldots, b_n\}$ are $R$-linearly independent, the elements $r_{m+1}$ and $r_{n+1}'$ must both be nonzero. Let $r=-r_{m+1}r_{n+1}'$, which is nonzero since $R$ is an integral domain. The above equalities then imply
> 
> $ra=(r_1r_{n+1}')a_1+\cdots+(r_mr_{n+1}')a_m\quad\text{and}\quad rb=(r_1'r_{m+1})b_1+\cdots+(r_m'r_{m+1})b_m,$
> 
> and so $r(a\oplus b)=ra\oplus rb\in N$. This, in turn, implies that the $r((a\oplus b)+N) = N = 0_{(A\oplus B)/N}$, and hence the coset $(a\oplus b)+N$ is torsion. We've therefore proven the module $(A\oplus B)/N$ is torsion.
> 
> By our work above, we can now conclude that the rank of $A\oplus B$ is exactly $m+n$.


</div></div>



## Problem 6
---


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><a class="markdown-embed-link" href="/10-19-teaching/11-classes/math-561-graduate-algebra/exercises/rank-and-quotients/" aria-label="Open link"><svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="svg-icon lucide-link"><path d="M10 13a5 5 0 0 0 7.54.54l3-3a5 5 0 0 0-7.07-7.07l-1.72 1.71"></path><path d="M14 11a5 5 0 0 0-7.54-.54l-3 3a5 5 0 0 0 7.07 7.07l1.71-1.71"></path></svg></a><div class="markdown-embed">




Let $R$ be an integral domain, $M$ an $R$-module and $N$ a submodule of $M$. Prove that the rank of $M$ is the sum of the ranks of $N$ and $M/N$.

(You may assume $M$ has finite rank.)

> [!info]- Hints
> Let $\{m_1+N,\ldots , m_s+N\}$ be a maximal $R$-linearly independent set in $M/N$ and $\{n_1,\ldots, n_l\}$ be a maximal $R$-linearly independent set in $N$. Show that the set $\{m_1,\ldots, m_s, n_1,\ldots, n_l\}$ is an $R$-linearly independent set in $M$. Then use an [[10-19 Teaching/11 Classes/MATH 561 - Graduate Algebra/Exercises/Alternate characterization of rank\|alternate characterization of rank]].

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> Let $k$ be the (finite) rank of the module $M$. Let $N$ be any submodule of $M$, and let $l$ be the rank of $N$. We immediately have that $l\leq k$. We claim that $M/N$ also has finite rank $s$ and that $s\leq k$.
> 
> To see this, note that if $\{m_1+N,\ldots , m_s+N\}$ is any $R$-linearly independent set in $M/N$, then the set $\{m_1,\ldots, m_s\}$ is also an $R$-linearly independent set of elements in $M$. Indeed, any relation $r_1m_1+\cdots +r_sm_s=0_M$ immediately yields a relation $r_1(m_1+N)+\cdots +r_s(m_s+N)=0_M+N = 0_{M/N}$. It follows that the rank of $M/N$ is no more than the rank $k$ of $M$. In particular, the rank of $M/N$ is finite.
> 
> Let $s$ be the rank of $M/N$ and let $\{m_1+N,\ldots , m_s+N\}$ be an $R$-linearly independent set. By the previous comment, the set $\{m_1,\ldots, m_s\}$ is then $R$-linearly independent in $M$. Let $\{n_1,\ldots, n_l\}$ be an $R$-linearly independent set in $N$. We claim the combined set $S=\{m_1,\ldots, m_s,n_1,\ldots, n_l\}$ is an $R$-linearly independent set in $M$. To see this, suppose we have a relation
> 
> $r_1m_1+\cdots +r_sm_s+r_1'n_1+\cdots +r_l'n_l=0_M.$
> 
> In the quotient module $M/N$ we have
> 
> $\begin{align*} (r_1m_1+\cdots +r_sm_s+r_1'n_1+\cdots +r_l'n_l)+N&=(r_1m_1+\cdots+r_sm_s)+N\\ &= r_1(m_1+N)+\cdots+r_s(m_s+N).\end{align*}$
> 
> Our earlier relation then gives the relation
> 
> $r_1(m_1+N)+\cdots +r_s(m_s+N)=0_{M/N}.$
> 
> Since the set $\{m_1+N,\ldots, m_s+N\}$ is $R$-linearly independent in $M/N$ this implies all $r_i=0_R$. Our earlier relation then simplifies to
> 
> $r_1'n_1+\cdots +r_l'n_l=0_M=0_N.$
> 
> Since the set $\{n_1,\ldots, n_l\}$ is $R$-linearly independent in $N$ this implies all $r_j'=0_R$. Thus our set $S=\{m_1,\ldots, m_s, n_1,\ldots, n_l\}$ is $R$-linearly independent. This proves that the rank $k$ of $M$ is at least $s+l$.
> 
> To prove the rank $k$ of $M$ is exactly $s+l$, we [[10-19 Teaching/11 Classes/MATH 561 - Graduate Algebra/Exercises/Alternate characterization of rank\|need only show]] that $M/P$ is torsion, where $P$ is the free submodule of $M$ generated by our set $S$. Take any element $m+P$ in the quotient module $M/P$. The set $\{m_1+N,\ldots, m_s+N, m+N\}$ must be $R$-linearly dependent in $M/N$, so there are some $r_i\in R$ (not all zero) such that
> 
> $r_1(m_1+N)+\cdots +r_s(m_s+N)+r_{s+1}(m+N)=0_{M/N}.$
> 
> Note that $r_{s+1}$ must be nonzero since the set $\{m_1+N,\ldots, m_s+N\}$ is $R$-linearly independent. The above equality implies
> 
> $r_1m_1+\cdots +r_sm_s+r_{s+1}m\in N.$
> 
> If we add this element to the set $\{n_1,\ldots, n_l\}$ then we must obtain an $R$-linearly dependent set, which means there are $r_j'\in R$ (not all zero) such that
> 
> $r_1'n_1+\cdots +r_l'n_l+r_{l+1}'(r_1m_1+\cdots +r_sm_s+r_{s+1}m)=0_N.$
> 
> Once again, the coefficient $r_{l+1}'$ must be nonzero since the set $\{n_1,\ldots, n_l\}$ is $R$-linearly independent. We can then use the above equation to obtain the equality
> 
> $(-r_{l+1}'r_{s+1})m=(r_1r_{l+1}')m_1+\cdots (r_sr_{l+1}')m_s+r_1'n_1+\cdots +r_l'n_l.$
> 
> If we let $r=-r_{l+1}'r_{s+1}$, then $r$ is nonzero (since $R$ is an integral domain) and the above equality implies $rm\in P$. Thus, the coset $r(m+P)=rm+P=P=0_{M/P}$ and hence the coset $m+P$ is torsion. This proves that the quotient module $M/P$ is torsion and hence, by our earlier discussion, the rank of $M$ is exactly $s+l$.



</div></div>


## Problem 7
---


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




Suppose $R$ is an integral domain and $M$ is a $R$-module.

1. Show that if $m$ is a nonzero torsion element in $M$, then the set $\{m\}$ is $R$-linearly dependent. Conclude that the rank of $\operatorname{Tor}(M)$ is 0.
2. Show that the rank of $M$ is the same as the rank of the quotient $M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)$.

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> 1. Suppose $m\in M$ is a nonzero torsion element, so $rm=0_M$ for some nonzero $r\in R$. The equation $rm=0_M$ implies (by definition!) that the set $\{m\}$ is $R$-linearly dependent. Also note that $1_R\cdot 0_M=0_M$, so even the set $\{0_M\}$ is $R$-linearly dependent.
>    
>    Now suppose $S$ is any nonempty of $\operatorname{Tor}(M)$. If $S=\{0_M\}$, then $S$ is $R$-linearly dependent. If $S$ contains any nonzero element $m$, then $m$ is a nonzero torsion element so by the above argument the set $\{m\}$ is $R$-linearly dependent and hence so is $S$.
>    
>    It follows that the only $R$-linearly independent subset of $\operatorname{Tor}(M)$ is the empty set, and hence the rank of $\operatorname{Tor}(M)$ is 0.
>    
> 2. For a quick solution, we can use [[10-19 Teaching/11 Classes/MATH 561 - Graduate Algebra/Exercises/Rank and quotients\|the relation between ranks and quotients]]. In this case, the submodule $\operatorname{Tor}(M)\subseteq M$ is a submodule of rank 0 (by above), so rank of $M$ is equal to the rank of $M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)$.
>    
>    We can also give a standalone proof. First suppose $\{m_1,\ldots, m_k\}$ is any $R$-linearly independent subset of $M$. We claim that the image of this set is an $R$-linearly independent subset of $M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)$. To see this, suppose we have a relation
>    
>    $r_1(m_1+\operatorname{Tor}(M))+\cdots +r_k(m_k+\operatorname{Tor}(M))=0.$
>    
>    By the definition of coset operations, the coset on the left is represented by $r_1m_1+\cdots +r_km_k$, and this element represents the zero coset in $M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)$ exactly when $r_1m_1+\cdots +r_km_k\in \operatorname{Tor}(M)$. This implies there is some nonzero $r\in R$ such that
>    
>    $r(r_1m_1+\cdots +r_km_k)=0_M,$
>    
>    which in turn implies
>    
>    $(rr_1)m_1+\cdots +(rr_k)m_k=0_M.$
>    
>    Since the set $\{m_1,\ldots, m_k\}$ is $R$-linearly independent, the above equality implies $rr_i=0_R$ for every $i$. Since $r$ is nonzero and $R$ is an integral domain, this implies $r_i=0$ for every $i$. We've therefore proven the set $\{m_1+\operatorname{Tor}(M),\ldots, m_k+\operatorname{Tor}(M)\}$ is an $R$-linearly independent subset of $M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)$. This proves that the rank of $M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)$ is at least as large as the rank of $M$.
>    
>    Conversely, suppose $\{m_1+\operatorname{Tor}(M),\ldots, m_k+\operatorname{Tor}(M)\}$ is an $R$-linearly independent set in $M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)$. Suppose there is an $R$-linear relation among the elements $m_1,\ldots, m_k$ in $M$, i.e., there are $r_i\in R$ such that
>    
>    $r_1m_1+\cdots +r_km_k=0_M.$
>    
>    Since $0_M\in \operatorname{Tor}(M)$, we then have the coset equality
>    
>    $(r_1m_1+\cdots +r_km_k)+\operatorname{Tor}(M)=0_{M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)};$
>    
>    i.e.,
>    
>    $r_1(m_1+\operatorname{Tor}(M))+\cdots+r_k(m_k+\operatorname{Tor}(M))=0$
>    
>    in $M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)$. Since the set $\{m_1+\operatorname{Tor}(M),\ldots, m_k+\operatorname{Tor}(M)\}$ is $R$-linearly independent, the above equality implies every $r_i=0_R$. Thus, the set $\{m_1,\ldots, m_k\}$ is also $R$-linearly independent in $M$. This proves that the rank of $M$ is at least as large as the rank of $M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)$.
>    
>    We've therefore proven $M$ and $M/\operatorname{Tor}(M)$ have the same rank.
   
   

</div></div>


## Problem 8
---


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




Let $R$ be an integral domain and $I\subseteq R$ be a non-principal ideal. Prove that $I$ is torsion free of rank 1, but $I$ is not a free $R$-module.

> [!info]- Hint
> To show that the rank of $I$ is no more than 1, observe that for any pair of nonzero elements $a,b\in I$ one has $b\cdot a+(-a)\cdot b = 0$ and so the set $\{a,b\}$ is $R$-linearly dependent.

</div></div>


> [!summary]- Solution
> First note that $I$ is contained in the integral domain $R$, so it is automatically torsion free. (If $ri=0$ for some $i\in I$ and nonzero $r\in R$, then the fact that $R$ is an integral domain implies $i=0$.) Also note that $I$ is nonzero, since the zero ideal is principal.
> 
> Next observe that for any pair of nonzero elements $a,b\in I$ one has $b\cdot a+(-a)\cdot b = 0$ and so the set $\{a,b\}$ is $R$-linearly dependent. This implies that the rank of $I$ must be less than 2. On the other hand, for any nonzero element $a\in A$ the set $\{a\}$ is $R$-linearly independent (since the only possible relations are of the form $ra=0$, which for nonzero $a$ yield only $r=0$). Thus, the rank of $I$ is exactly 1.
> 
> Finally, we claim $I$ is not free as an $R$-module. To see why, suppose to the contrary that $I$ were free as an $R$-module. We would then have an $R$-module isomorphism $I\simeq R^n$ for some $n\geq 1$. The rank of $R^n$ is $n$ (and rank is invariant under isomorphism), so we must then have $I\simeq R$. Such an $R$-module isomorphism corresponds to the choice of an element $a\in I$ that generates $I$ as an $R$-module. But this implies $I$ is a principal ideal, contrary to our assumption $I$ is non-principal.



</div></div>
