---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/50-59-logs/51-class-summaries/2025-fall/math-561/2025-09/2025-09-29/","updated":"2025-09-29T10:23:14-07:00"}
---

This following is a very brief summary of what happened in class on 2025-09-29.

We introduced three new constructions on modules:
	1. The [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Direct products of modules\|direct product]] of a pair of $R$-modules
	2. The [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Direct sums of modules\|direct sum]] of a pair of $R$-modules
	3. The [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Sums of submodules\|sum]] of a pair of submodules of a given $R$-modules

We outlined the three constructions (as sets with binary operations and $R$-actions) within the framework of category theory. We talked about how the first two constructions occur in the category $R\textbf{-Mod}$ and satisfy similar ("dual") universal properties, while the third construction happens in a different category (namely the category of submodules of a fixed module). We also mentioned the idea of extending these constructions to entire families of modules (or submodules).

Tomorrow we'll officially extend these construction to arbitrary collections of modules (or submodules), briefly outline some of the main properties of the three constructions, including when they're different and when they're the same/isomorphic.

Looking forward, before moving on to our next construction on modules ([[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Free modules\|free modules]]) we'll introduce the notion of a [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Category theory/Basic structures/Natural transformations\|natural transformation]], which will finally allow us to start making many of our informal arguments and descriptors precise and formal.
## Concepts
---

- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Direct products of modules\|Direct products of modules]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Direct sums of modules\|Direct sums of modules]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Sums of submodules\|Sums of submodules]]
- [[40-49 Knowledge/41 Mathematics/Module theory/Constructions on modules/Direct products vs. direct sums vs. sums\|Direct products vs. direct sums vs. sums]]

## References
---

- Dummit & Foote, *Abstract Algebra*: Section 10.3